Project Title:
Breast Cancer Classification Using Convolutional Neural Networks


Your Name:
Jathin Lalith. D
Date:
7 July 2025


Abstract:
Breast cancer is a leading cause of mortality among women worldwide. Early and accurate detection is critical to improving patient outcomes. In this project, i developed CancerNet, a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)-based classifier capable of distinguishing between benign and malignant histology  images from the Invasive Ductal Carcinoma (IDC) dataset. The model was trained and evaluated on 2,77,524 image patches, achieving 85.76% classification accuracy on the test dataset. Results showed the usefullness of applying deep learning for automated histopathological diagnosis.


Table of Contents:
Introduction
Literature Review
Problem Statement
Data Collection and Preprocessing
Methodology
Implementation
Results
Discussion
Conclusion
Questions
References
Appendices
Acknowledgments
1. Introduction:


Breast cancer is among the most common and deadly diseases affecting women worldwide. Early detection is crucial for improving patient survival rates. Traditionally, diagnosing cancer relies on pathologists manually seeing and analyzing histopathology slides, which is time-consuming and human error may happen.

This project addresses these challenges by developing CancerNet, a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model to automatically classify breast cancer histology images as benign or malignant. Using the IDC dataset, which contains labeled image patches of breast tissue.

The aim is to create a robust AI system that can help pathologists to identify it in early.

Objectives:
Design and train a CNN model capable of learning key patterns in histology images.
Evaluate performance using metrics like accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score.
Demonstrate the potential of deep learning for improving cancer detection workflows.
AI Techniques Used:
The project uses CNNs implemented with TensorFlow and Keras, along with data augmentation and preprocessing methods to enhance the model’s accuracy.


2. Literature Review:

Several studies have applied machine learning and deep learning to histopathological image analysis. CNNs have shown state-of-the-art performance in image classification tasks due to their ability to learn hierarchical representations of spatial features.

Relevant works include:
Spanhol et al. (2016), who created the IDC dataset used in this project.  https://www.researchgate.net/publication/283513314_A_Dataset_for_Breast_Cancer_Histopathological_Image_Classification
Cireşan et al. (2013), demonstrating CNN efficacy in mitosis detection in breast cancer histology    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260432401_Mitosis_Detection_in_Breast_Cancer_Histology_Images_with_Deep_Neural_Networks
Recent advances with ResNet and Vision Transformers, which outperform traditional CNNs in some contexts.
Challenges:
Few of the images were bad images 
It took a long time to train and test the model


3. Problem Statement:
Problem Definition:
Develop a Convolutional Neural Network to classify histology images as benign or malignant using the IDC dataset.

Assumptions & Limitations:
The model assumes that 50×50 patches adequately represent cancerous regions.
Limited to binary classification of IDC presence.
Performance can be affected by data imbalance.
May take a long time in training
It has no bad images
4. Data Collection and Preprocessing:
Dataset:
IDC_regular dataset from Kaggle, consisting of 2,77,524 image patches extracted from breast cancer histology slides.

Steps Taken:
a).Downloaded and verified dataset integrity.

b). Split data into:

80% Training
10% Validation
10% Testing
c). Applied preprocessing:
Rescaling pixel values.
Data augmentation (rotation, flipping, scaling) for training data.
Normalization.
Organized images into directory structures suitable for Keras generators.


5. Methodology
Technique Used:
Deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
Rationale:
CNNs are proven efficiency and effectiveness for image classification due to their capacity to learn spatial hierarchies and pattern finding.
Key Parameters:
Input Size: (48×48×3)
Optimizer: Adam
Loss: Categorical Crossentropy
Metrics: Accuracy
Batch Size: 32
Epochs: 3 (initial training)


6. Implementation:
Model Architecture/ Structure:
The CancerNet CNN includes:
Convolutional layers with ReLU activations
Batch Normalization layers
MaxPooling layers
Dropout for regularization
Flattening and Dense layers with softmax output


Environment:
Frameworks: TensorFlow and Keras
Language: Python 3.x
Interface: Jupyter Notebook
Training and Testing Split:
Training: 80%
Validation: 10%
Testing: 10%
Code Repository:
https://github.com/Jathin-24/Project_2


7. Results:
Performance Metrics (after 3 epochs):
Accuracy: 85.76%
Specificity (True Negative Rate): 66.92%
Sensitivity (True Positive Rate): 93.11%


Confusion Matrix:


                                    Predicted Benign              Predicted Malignant

Actual Benign                           39,163                             2,897

Actual Malignant                         5,433                             10,991



Classification Report:


Class                     Precision       Recall          F1-score          Support

0 (Benign)                0.88             0.93               0.90              42,060

1 (Malignant)           0.79              0.67               0.73              16,424



Macro Avg F1-score: 0.81
Weighted Avg F1-score: 0.85

Training History:


Below is a plot of training and validation loss and accuracy across epochs:



Comparison to Baselines:
Traditional classifiers such as SVMs and Random Forests on similar datasets typically achieve ~75–80% accuracy. CancerNet shows improved performance (~86%) but does not yet reach the accuracy of deeper architectures like ResNet (90%+).



8. Discussion:

Overall, the model performed well, with high recall for benign cases (about 93%) and good precision (around 88%). However, the recall for malignant cases was lower (67%), which means the model sometimes misses cancerous samples. This is important because in real-life scenarios, false negatives can be serious.

There is not much overfitting in the training, because I only trained for 3 epochs. Training longer, like 5–10 epochs, might help improve the results. Also, using more advanced models or transfer learning with pretrained networks like ResNet wil potentially increase accuracy, especially for malignant cases.

The main strength of this approach is that CNNs are really good at learning image features automatically. The limitation is that sensitivity to cancer cases wasn’t as high as I’d like, so there’s room for improvement in detecting malignant patches.



9. Conclusion:

This project successfully implemented a CNN classifier, CancerNet, capable of distinguishing benign and malignant breast cancer histology patches with ~86% accuracy. This demonstrates the potential of deep learning to assist pathologists in early diagnosis and treatment planning.

Potential Real-World Use:
Pre-screening histology slides to prioritize cases for pathologist review.
Supporting early detection efforts in hospitals and research centers.
Integrating into automated pathology workflows to improve consistency and reduce workload.
Future Work:
Training additional epochs (5, 10, or more) to improve convergence.
Incorporating explainability methods.
Experimenting with transfer learning for higher accuracy.


10. Questions:

What is the training and testing split you used?
80% training, 10% validation, 10% testing.


How many epochs did you run your model?
3 epochs initially.


Is CNN the best model? Alternatives?
CNNs are strong for images, but ResNet or Vision Transformers may perform better.


Accuracy after 5 or 10 epochs?
Not measured yet; likely higher than the 3-epoch result of ~86%.


Is your model overfitting or underfitting?
No clear overfitting observed in 3 epochs; further training recommended.


How would you use it in real life?
Integrate into pathology labs as a triaging tool to assist pathologists.


11. References
Spanhol, F. A., Oliveira, L. S., Petitjean, C., & Heutte, L. (2016). A dataset for breast cancer histopathological image classification. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 63(7), 1455–1462.
Deep Learning Based Methods for Breast Cancer Diagnosis: A Systematic Review and Future Direction
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9818155/
https://www.kaggle.com/code/prakharbhartiya1/breast-cancer-detection/data


12. Appendices


A. Model Code Snippets
Full implementation is provided in the accompanying Jupyter Notebook.


B. Instructions to Reproduce


Install dependencies:
pip install tensorflow keras imutils matplotlib
Download the IDC dataset.
Open the notebook and execute all cells sequentially.



13. Acknowledgments
Special thanks to the TensorFlow community and the Kaggle platform for providing valuable resources and datasets that made this project possible.

